1. About PBSIM

We have developed a long reads simulater (called PBSIM) in which
sampling-based and model-based simulations are implemented.

PBSIM simulates Continuous Long Reads (CLRs) of PacBio, and Nanopore reads.


2. Run PBSIM with the sample data

To run model-based simulation:

    pbsim --depth 20
          --hmm_model data/P6C4.model
          sample/sample.fasta

In the example above, simulated reads are randomly sampled from a reference
sequence ("sample/sample.fasta") and differences (errors) are introduced
into simulated reads. Coverage depth is 20, and quality scores are generated
by FIC-HMM of P6C4 chemistry. The read length and accuracy reads are determined
based on our model.

If the reference sequence is a multi-FASTA file, Output files for simulated
reads are created for each FASTA. three output files are created for each FASTA.
"sd\_0001.ref": a single-FASTA file which is copied from the reference sequence.
"sd\_0001.fastq": a simulated read dataset in the FASTQ format.
"sd\_0001.maf": a list of alignments between the reference sequence and
simulated reads in the MAF format.

To run sampling-based simulation:

    pbsim --depth 20
          --sample-fastq sample/sample.fastq
          sample/sample.fasta

In the sampling-based simulation, read length and quality score are the same
as those of a read sampled randomly from the real read dataset
("sample/sample.fastq").

If you want to create several simulated data with different coverage depths
using the same real read dataset, you would be better to use 
--sample-profile-id option as below. You can skip parsing the same dataset.

  (1) storing profile

    pbsim --depth 20
          --prefix depth20
          --sample-fastq sample/sample.fastq
          --sample-profile-id pf1
          sample/sample.fasta

  (2) reusing profile

    pbsim --depth 30
          --prefix depth30
          --sample-profile-id pf1
          sample/sample.fasta

    pbsim --depth 40
          --prefix depth40
          --sample-profile-id pf1
          sample/sample.fasta


3. Model-based simulation

For each read, the length is randomly drawn from the gamma distribution
with given mean and standard deviation.

The exponential function which is fit to read accuracy distribution is
utilized to simulate with given mean. For each read, the accuracy is randomly
drawn from the simulated distribution.

Errors from single molecule sequencing which generates long reads are
considered to be stochastical. However, it has been reported that basecalling
qualities of PacBio sequencers are not uniform, and low quality regions
are sometimes observed in reads. To simulate these low quality regions,
the non-uniformity is generated by FIC-HMM trained using real long reads.
"data/\*.model" are FIC-HMM for each chemistry of PacBio and Nanopore.

Simulated reads are randomly sampled from a reference sequence.
The percentage of both directions of reads is same. Differences (errors)
are introduced into the simulated reads as follows:
For each position of the read, all error types (substitution, insertion and
deletion) are introduced according to quality score at that position. 
All error rates are calculated from quality score and the ratio of error types
given by the user. With regards to a deletion, there is no quality score 
for the deletion itself; thus the quality score of the 5’neighbor is used. 
We observed that inserted nucleotides are often the same as their following 
nucleotides. According to this bias, half of the inserted nucleotides are 
chosen to be the same as their following nucleotides, and the other half
are randomly chosen.

By setting minimum and maximum of read length, and range of that chosen
from the distribution model can be restricted. Note that mean and standard
deviation of the chosen read length are influenced by this restriction.
Minimum and maximum of read accuracy are determined by mean of accuracy.


4. Sampling-based simulation

The lengths and quality scores of reads are simulated by randomly sampling
them from real reads provided by the user. Subsequently, their nucleotide
sequences are simulated by the same way as the model-based simulation.
The restriction of read length and accuracy can be set by the options.


5. Input files

PBSIM requires reference sequences in the single- or multi-FASTA Format. 

A real reads in FASTQ format is required for sampling-based simulation,
specified with the --sample-fastq option. FASTQ format must be Sanger
standard (fastq-sanger).

Input file must be a text file.


6. Output files

If a reference sequence file is multi-FASTA format, simulated datasets
are generated for each reference sequence numbered sequentially.
Three output files are created for each reference sequence.

"sd\_<num>.ref": a single-FASTA file which is copied from the reference
sequence.
"sd\_<num>.fastq": a simulated read dataset in the FASTQ format.
"sd\_<num>.maf": a list of alignments between the reference sequence and
the simulated reads in the MAF format.

"sd" is prefix which can be specified with the --prefix option.


7. FIC-HMM of quality code

"data/\*.model" are FIC-HMM for each chemistry of PacBio and Nanopore. 
We utilized HMM with the latest model selection criteria called factorised
information criteria (FIC-HMM)(Hamada et al., 2015). The model were trained
for each read accuracy of each chemistry. For read accuracy with insufficient
training data, constant quality scores that match the accuracy were used.


8. Runtime and memory

When a coverage depth is 100x and a length of reference sequence is about 10M,
PBSIM generates simulated dataset in several minutes. The runtime is roughly
proportional to the coverage depth and the length of reference sequence. 
PBSIM requires memory of the length of reference sequence plus several mega
bytes. 


9. Error simulation for templates

Simulation of sequencing error is performed using nucleotide sequences input 
by the user as templates.

    pbsim --template-fasta templates(FASTA format)
          --hmm_model data/P6C4.model

PBSIM2 uses model-based simulation to introduce errors into the templates. 
You can use the error rate options, but not the length options. Also, 
the --depth option is disabled and the template is sequenced once.

